enc/guidance.md, before:

# A Short Guide

> Goblins ambushed the Warden's son and his entourage, and took them captive. A group of rangers tracked them down, and after a bloody fight, one returned with two goblins on a leash, who are now to guide the PCs to their lair.

## Broch

Before dusk, as one of the PCs blows the evening pipes, and others line the top of the broch to shoot at any monster that comes from the woods, they spot a man entering the bailey half a mile away. He seems to have with him two half-naked, child-sized figures, pulling them by a leash tied around their necks, but any more details than that are hard to spot at this distance.

If PCs report this to the jotter, he sends them out immediately to investigate, in the dark, with all the monsters possibly out, summoned by the pipes. Otherwise, a messenger arrives first thing in the morning, informing the jotter that a wounded ranger barely made it to the bailey last night, dragging with him two goblins on a leash. His leg is badly hurt, and he request urgent assistance, and the jotter sends PCs to investigate.

## Bailey

At the bailey, ranger Spittlespite lays groaning in bed, festering wound in his leg, loaded crossbow at the ready, and a couple of scared farmers with pitchforks watching over two goblins in the corner.

> A bloodied servant of the warden's son told us that their caravan has been ambushed by goblins, so naturally, we had to move immediately, or the warden would have our heads if he hears we hesitated...

He explains that his group of rangers caught up to the goblins, who ate the caravan's horses on the spot, and took the men captive, to save for later. The battle took a high toll, and none of the rangers survived, save for Spittlespite, who managed to take two goblins captive.

> But we killed a lot of those Sylph's sucklings, too. No more than four goblins survived, and ushered bound prisoners in the direction of, what I believe, must be their lair. But those will grow hungry soon, and I fear you have no more than a couple of days before all those men are goblin feed.

Pointing towards two goblins, he continues:

> Take one with you; two are too much trouble, as you can see by my leg. They seem to only understand blade and food, but that should be enough for them to take you to where others are.

The farmers are willing to sell some food to PCs, at a somewhat higher price than usual: 'You get your food at the broch, if mine's too pricey. I've got mouths to feed, and taxes to pay'.

## The Woods

The goblin's lair is 20 miles away, in the part of the woods seldom traversed. Only the goblin knows where exactly, but is unable to say. Dense forest terrain limits the travel to 4 miles per interval. The missing troupe numbers 9 men, plus the warden's son, and goblins will eat one person per interval, on average. Warden's son is not above manipulating and sacrificing his men to save his own hide, so he will ensure that he is the last one to go.

The goblin starts with 3 EP. It requires 3 rations per day, and each ration it doesn't eat will gain it 2 EP at the end of the day.

The goblin doesn't speak the same language as PCs, but it understands the offers of food, and threats of violence. If the goblin's hands are tied, it will be visibly upset, and will try to subtly lead the troupe in a wrong direction, moving one mile away from the lair each interval. Intelligence + Survival at TN 10 to notice at the start of each interval, or PCs realize after two intervals. It might also occasionally trip on purpose, and then struggle to get up, making the troupe move one less mile each interval. At night, it will attempt to eat as much food as possible, and destroy any equipment, if left unsupervised.

It is malicious, cunning, and shameless, and its behaviour will primarily depend on how hungry it is. Each interval, note its EP, then select (or if you prefer, roll 1D6 for) one of appropriate options. Don't repeat any results, unless you used all of the ones under the same section:

If the goblin is well fed (no EP, and has eaten this interval):

1. Lazily drags its feet, and will fall asleep if left undisturbed. The troupe moves two miles less this interval, unless someone keeps hurrying the goblin, in which case, the penalty reduces to one mile.
1. Needs to take a dump. A big one. No, it doesn't need to go to a bush, nor does it care if anyone's watching, it'll do it right here, right now. In fact, there is a grin across its face as the most horrid smell violates the troupe's nostrils. Everybody who stays nearby during the suspiciously lengthy act will stink for an interval.
1. Squeals while pointing at PCs rations and its stomach. Throws a tantrum if not fed.
1. Throws a handful of its fresh shit on the campfire, then wipes its hand on the closest PC. If the campfire is not extinguished, the stench will prevent anyone nearby (except the goblin) from sleeping well that night, resulting in one extra EP in the morning.
1. Leads the troupe through mud, then tries to trip the clumsiest PC, who resists with Dexterity + Athletics against goblin's Dexterity + Brawl. If it succeeds, it cackles at its victim, as they struggle in deep mud.
1. Attempts to steal from a PC. It will prioritize whatever useful thing it can destroy, or secretly drop in a bush, or anything sharp or easily flammable it can use to cause harm.

If the goblin is reasonably fed (at least one EP, or hasn't eaten this interval):

1. Excitedly pulls in a new direction: on the ground, there are fresh tracks of a large boar. The goblin points towards them, and then towards troupe's weapons. Going after the boar will send the troupe one mile away from their goal, and successfully tracking it down will require a Wits + Survival at TN 12.
1. Picks up a fistful of dirt, and throws it in the face of the closest PC, blinding them on a hit. Then it tries to escape.
1. Screeches loudly enough to attract an encounter.
1. Falls down, and pretends it sprained an ankle, crying in pain. If a PC tries to examine it up close, it leaps and tries to bite them. If the wound isn't treated with Intelligence + Medicine at TN 10, an infection develops, and the PC gains one EP in the following interval (and the treatment TN rises by 2), and loses one HP one interval after that.
1. Spots that stitching is loose on one of the PCs bags, then bites into it, tearing a hole. All the items in it spill to the ground, and the bag becomes unusable. The PC without a bag can carry items only in its hands.
1. Feels spiteful, and leads the troupe through a Thorny Thicket.[^thicket] Being almost naked, it wants to be carried through the spiky growths, but if the PC carrying it has any food, it will try to steal and immediately eat some. It has +2 to this roll due to surprise and terrain.

If the goblin is hungry (more then one EP, but less EP then HP):

1. Leads the troupe into a cave, but there is only a stash of dried nuts (worth one ration) hidden under a rock there. This moves the troupe one mile further from the lair.
1. Drools, and hungrily stares at the weakest PC, or the troupe's pack animal.
1. Hungrily screams during night, waking everyone up. All PCs will have one more EP in the morning, due to a sleepless night.
1. Jumps on a nearby PCs backpack, trying to steal and immediately eat food. If the PCs manage to tear it off the backpack before it succeeds, it will grab a random item instead, preferably something small, and fling it into woods. Wits + Vigilance at TN 10 to find the item fast, or the troupe will have to spend more time looking for it, moving one less mile this interval.
1. It forages as it goes, and eats everything the moment it picks it up. It rolls a Wits + Survival at TN 14, and on success, will only find enough for one ration during the whole interval. Stopping, and slightly deviating from the path all the time means that the troupe travels two miles less this interval.
1. When PCs are about to eat, it spits on their food, making sure it's seen. A big, nasty ball of spit, with a glob of something foul in it, that the goblin picked up and chewed along the way. Is that earwax? The goblin hopes no one will want to eat this now, so it can have it all. Anyone eating this food has to roll Strength + Survival at TN 12, or they develop a random disease[^disease] on the start of the next day.

If the goblin is starving (more EP than HP):

1. It leads the troupe to a griffin eating a dead deer. The goblin will slobber and gesticulate towards the carcass, and if PCs try to move on, it will raise a lot of noise, provoking the beast to charge at the troupe, protecting its catch. This detour leads the troupe one mile away from the lair, and the remains of the dear provide two rations.
1. Becomes disoriented, leading the troupe two miles away from the lair. PCs can realize the direction makes no sense with Intelligence + Survival at TN 10, but this only stops them from moving further away, and they make no progress forward this interval.
1. Attacks a PC, but falls to the ground, tired, after a round.
1. Faints, losing consciousness for an interval. Intelligence + Medicine at TN 10 to wake it up, but unless fed, it still takes an interval for it to be able to properly lead the troupe.
1. To check if anything is edible. Digs through the dirt, rummages through bushes, chews grass, but finds no food. The troupe moves one less mile this interval.
1. Goes delirious, bites off one of its fingers, and eats it. Loses one HP.

## The Goblin Lair

![the map](https://dysonlogos.blog/2022/09/16/the-idol-pit/)

Entrance smells of burnt meat, and is covered with a tangle of stacked branches and leaves, masking it from the outside. If the barrier is disturbed, a human skull, loosely hanging on the inside of it, rolls down the cave mouth, alerting the lone goblin in the lower right cave. Carefully examining the branches reveals the skull, otherwise it's Wits + Vigilance at TN 8 to notice, for the PC who moves them. Any loud noises will echo through the caves and alert all the goblins.

Lower right cave - One goblin gnawing on a leg bone, guarding the captives.

Upper left cave - A small fire dimly lights the floor littered with bones, one goblin eating badly cooked human remains, and two more asleep.

Lower left cave - Human captives, if any remain at this time. Their arms and legs are bound with their own torn clothes, and each has 2 EP for every day since they were abducted.

[^disease]: Metabind, p. 156
[^thicket]: Metabind, p. 156

Commit message:

expand goblin intro
For halfshots, I'm thinking the reader should find the standard
procedure for brochs at the start, if it's relevant to the module.

enc/guidance.md, after:

# A Short Guide

> Goblins ambushed the Warden's son and his entourage, and took them captive. A group of rangers tracked them down, and after a bloody fight, one returned with two goblins on a leash, who are now to guide the PCs to their lair.

## Broch

The troupe's first mission would be an easy one, but the broch's jotter is not good at conveying information.

> The pipes blow from the top of the broch, to summon monsters, at dawn and dusk.
> But the piper's on holiday, and the rangers left on a special mission, so it's up to one of you to go up and play.
> Or if you can't play, shout.

The jotter fails to mention that someone should be at every window of the broch, waiting with a bow.

A Strength + Performance roll at TN 12 means a raknid approaches the broch.

Whether or not the pipes succeed, anyone on the top can see a figure before dusk:

> On the high hill, on top of a tower, feels like being on top of the world.
> A sea of green stretches out in every direction.
> Small openings let you see patches of the Lonely Road, heading towards open farmland.
> The farmland huddles around a distant town.
> 
> Not far below, a bailey's high walls stand defiantly against the Edge.
> And a man approaches the bailey, with two child-sized figures on a leash, both pale and naked.

If PCs report this to the jotter,
he sends them out immediately to investigate.

Otherwise,
a messenger arrives first thing in the morning, informing the jotter that a wounded ranger barely made it to the bailey last night, dragging with him two goblins on a leash.
His leg is badly hurt, and he request urgent assistance, and the jotter sends PCs to investigate.

## At the Bailey

At the bailey, ranger Spittlespite lays groaning in bed, festering wound in his leg, loaded crossbow at the ready, and a couple of scared farmers with pitchforks watching over two goblins in the corner.

> A bloodied servant of the warden's son told us that their caravan has been ambushed by goblins, so naturally, we had to move immediately, or the warden would have our heads if he hears we hesitated...

He explains that his group of rangers caught up to the goblins, who ate the caravan's horses on the spot, and took the men captive, to save for later. The battle took a high toll, and none of the rangers survived, save for Spittlespite, who managed to take two goblins captive.

> But we killed a lot of those Sylph's sucklings, too. No more than four goblins survived, and ushered bound prisoners in the direction of, what I believe, must be their lair. But those will grow hungry soon, and I fear you have no more than a couple of days before all those men are goblin feed.

Pointing towards two goblins, he continues:

> Take one with you; two are too much trouble, as you can see by my leg. They seem to only understand blade and food, but that should be enough for them to take you to where others are.

The farmers are willing to sell some food to PCs, at a somewhat higher price than usual: 'You get your food at the broch, if mine's too pricey. I've got mouths to feed, and taxes to pay'.

## The Woods

The goblin's lair is 20 miles away, in the part of the woods seldom traversed. Only the goblin knows where exactly, but is unable to say. Dense forest terrain limits the travel to 4 miles per interval. The missing troupe numbers 9 men, plus the warden's son, and goblins will eat one person per interval, on average. Warden's son is not above manipulating and sacrificing his men to save his own hide, so he will ensure that he is the last one to go.

The goblin starts with 3 EP. It requires 3 rations per day, and each ration it doesn't eat will gain it 2 EP at the end of the day.

The goblin doesn't speak the same language as PCs, but it understands the offers of food, and threats of violence. If the goblin's hands are tied, it will be visibly upset, and will try to subtly lead the troupe in a wrong direction, moving one mile away from the lair each interval. Intelligence + Survival at TN 10 to notice at the start of each interval, or PCs realize after two intervals. It might also occasionally trip on purpose, and then struggle to get up, making the troupe move one less mile each interval. At night, it will attempt to eat as much food as possible, and destroy any equipment, if left unsupervised.

It is malicious, cunning, and shameless, and its behaviour will primarily depend on how hungry it is. Each interval, note its EP, then select (or if you prefer, roll 1D6 for) one of appropriate options. Don't repeat any results, unless you used all of the ones under the same section:

If the goblin is well fed (no EP, and has eaten this interval):

1. Lazily drags its feet, and will fall asleep if left undisturbed. The troupe moves two miles less this interval, unless someone keeps hurrying the goblin, in which case, the penalty reduces to one mile.
1. Needs to take a dump. A big one. No, it doesn't need to go to a bush, nor does it care if anyone's watching, it'll do it right here, right now. In fact, there is a grin across its face as the most horrid smell violates the troupe's nostrils. Everybody who stays nearby during the suspiciously lengthy act will stink for an interval.
1. Squeals while pointing at PCs rations and its stomach. Throws a tantrum if not fed.
1. Throws a handful of its fresh shit on the campfire, then wipes its hand on the closest PC. If the campfire is not extinguished, the stench will prevent anyone nearby (except the goblin) from sleeping well that night, resulting in one extra EP in the morning.
1. Leads the troupe through mud, then tries to trip the clumsiest PC, who resists with Dexterity + Athletics against goblin's Dexterity + Brawl. If it succeeds, it cackles at its victim, as they struggle in deep mud.
1. Attempts to steal from a PC. It will prioritize whatever useful thing it can destroy, or secretly drop in a bush, or anything sharp or easily flammable it can use to cause harm.

If the goblin is reasonably fed (at least one EP, or hasn't eaten this interval):

1. Excitedly pulls in a new direction: on the ground, there are fresh tracks of a large boar. The goblin points towards them, and then towards troupe's weapons. Going after the boar will send the troupe one mile away from their goal, and successfully tracking it down will require a Wits + Survival at TN 12.
1. Picks up a fistful of dirt, and throws it in the face of the closest PC, blinding them on a hit. Then it tries to escape.
1. Screeches loudly enough to attract an encounter.
1. Falls down, and pretends it sprained an ankle, crying in pain. If a PC tries to examine it up close, it leaps and tries to bite them. If the wound isn't treated with Intelligence + Medicine at TN 10, an infection develops, and the PC gains one EP in the following interval (and the treatment TN rises by 2), and loses one HP one interval after that.
1. Spots that stitching is loose on one of the PCs bags, then bites into it, tearing a hole. All the items in it spill to the ground, and the bag becomes unusable. The PC without a bag can carry items only in its hands.
1. Feels spiteful, and leads the troupe through a Thorny Thicket.[^thicket] Being almost naked, it wants to be carried through the spiky growths, but if the PC carrying it has any food, it will try to steal and immediately eat some. It has +2 to this roll due to surprise and terrain.

If the goblin is hungry (more then one EP, but less EP then HP):

1. Leads the troupe into a cave, but there is only a stash of dried nuts (worth one ration) hidden under a rock there. This moves the troupe one mile further from the lair.
1. Drools, and hungrily stares at the weakest PC, or the troupe's pack animal.
1. Hungrily screams during night, waking everyone up. All PCs will have one more EP in the morning, due to a sleepless night.
1. Jumps on a nearby PCs backpack, trying to steal and immediately eat food. If the PCs manage to tear it off the backpack before it succeeds, it will grab a random item instead, preferably something small, and fling it into woods. Wits + Vigilance at TN 10 to find the item fast, or the troupe will have to spend more time looking for it, moving one less mile this interval.
1. It forages as it goes, and eats everything the moment it picks it up. It rolls a Wits + Survival at TN 14, and on success, will only find enough for one ration during the whole interval. Stopping, and slightly deviating from the path all the time means that the troupe travels two miles less this interval.
1. When PCs are about to eat, it spits on their food, making sure it's seen. A big, nasty ball of spit, with a glob of something foul in it, that the goblin picked up and chewed along the way. Is that earwax? The goblin hopes no one will want to eat this now, so it can have it all. Anyone eating this food has to roll Strength + Survival at TN 12, or they develop a random disease[^disease] on the start of the next day.

If the goblin is starving (more EP than HP):

1. It leads the troupe to a griffin eating a dead deer. The goblin will slobber and gesticulate towards the carcass, and if PCs try to move on, it will raise a lot of noise, provoking the beast to charge at the troupe, protecting its catch. This detour leads the troupe one mile away from the lair, and the remains of the dear provide two rations.
1. Becomes disoriented, leading the troupe two miles away from the lair. PCs can realize the direction makes no sense with Intelligence + Survival at TN 10, but this only stops them from moving further away, and they make no progress forward this interval.
1. Attacks a PC, but falls to the ground, tired, after a round.
1. Faints, losing consciousness for an interval. Intelligence + Medicine at TN 10 to wake it up, but unless fed, it still takes an interval for it to be able to properly lead the troupe.
1. To check if anything is edible. Digs through the dirt, rummages through bushes, chews grass, but finds no food. The troupe moves one less mile this interval.
1. Goes delirious, bites off one of its fingers, and eats it. Loses one HP.

## The Goblin Lair

![the map](https://dysonlogos.blog/2022/09/16/the-idol-pit/)

Entrance smells of burnt meat, and is covered with a tangle of stacked branches and leaves, masking it from the outside. If the barrier is disturbed, a human skull, loosely hanging on the inside of it, rolls down the cave mouth, alerting the lone goblin in the lower right cave. Carefully examining the branches reveals the skull, otherwise it's Wits + Vigilance at TN 8 to notice, for the PC who moves them. Any loud noises will echo through the caves and alert all the goblins.

Lower right cave - One goblin gnawing on a leg bone, guarding the captives.

Upper left cave - A small fire dimly lights the floor littered with bones, one goblin eating badly cooked human remains, and two more asleep.

Lower left cave - Human captives, if any remain at this time. Their arms and legs are bound with their own torn clothes, and each has 2 EP for every day since they were abducted.

[^disease]: Metabind, p. 156
[^thicket]: Metabind, p. 156
